---
title: oh boy oh boy oh boy let's talk about Obsidian and D&D
tags: dnd obsidian markdown notcode
---

I'll start with two disclaimers:
  1. I've been avoiding development work in my free time. It be like that.
  2. I hate to sound like a shill, and can never be sure of the line between blatant advertisement and
      enthusiasm

So, now that that's out of the way... I've been playing a lot of Dungeons & Dragons. Or, at least, a
lot for someone with a social limit of one activity per week.
Outside of my regular campaign and a steady drumbeat of one-shots, I've picked up DM'ing with some
close friends who had expressed interest in playing before, but didn't have anyone to run a game for
them. I'm not _super_ comfortable with it yet, but the vibe is super causual because I'm the most
experienced player, and also because the group that is playing is basically the dream-team for "I
have no idea what the hell I'm doing and I need your patience while I figure it out."

I have also recently transitioned to using [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) as a markdown editor
(from Typora), because Obsidian has vim controls and I'm deep enough into vim-brainrot that it's
difficult to write large chunks of text without vim support[^1].

I'm not proud of swapping for the reasons I did, but I don't regret it. Obsidian is significantly
more featureful than Typora, to the degree that it's silly to even imply that they solve the same
set of problems. I primarily used Typora for writing technical notes and design documents in my
previous position, and any personal note-taking that happened through Typora was merely for the convenience
of writing in markdown.
Obsidian, on the other hand, is not so much a markdown editor, as it is a markdown-enabled knowledge
base creator that allows you to connect your ideas together in text in a way that I find to be
particularly intuitive.

So, because D&D requires a fair amount of mental organization, and the campaign I'm running is over
the internet (and will remain so even post-Covid), I did some poking around to find out if anyone
had tips for how to organize a D&D game using Obisidan. As it turns out, [yes](https://blog.mjb.im/running-tabletop-games-with-obsidian).
I won't go into too much detail here, because the linked blog post explains much better than I can
why Obsidian is an ideal environment for running a game, BUT I did want to put some thoughts here,
now that I have run (and planned) a few sessions using [Michael Barret's 5e SRD obsidian-formatted reference](https://github.com/twisterghost/5e-obsidian).

Quick note before continuing: I'm running the Sunless Citadel for my group currently, and screenshots
contain mild early-game spoilers, if that's something that you'd like to avoid.

#### Multiplexing
Obsidian can be used in a single-pane edit mode, which is the default to this when opening new files.
That said, the real power comes in when using the environment as a multiplexer, which is one of the
main bullet-point features of Obsidian. Splitting your screen into as many panes as you need in the
moment allows the editor to function as a standard DM-screen.

{% include embeded_image.html url="/assets/img/posts/2021-06-20-obsidian/multiplexer.png" description="Multiplexer in action" %}

This works particularly well for me, because the hotkey settings are robust enough to allow me to
mimic my tmux pane-swapping commands in the editor, meaning that I can continue mouseless editing
and navigation as though I'm in my standard vim/tmux work environment.

#### Templates
Another really nice feature of Obsidian is the ability to define a template folder, which is accessible
with the Templates plugin[^2]. The template feature itself isn't anything earth-shattering-- you create
a basic markdown file with a layout that you think you'll use often, and then you can insert that template
into any file and edit it to suit your immediate needs.

I'm almost certainly not using these guys to their full potential, but I'm already seeing a lot of benefit
in being able to save a consistent format for certain concepts.

{% include embeded_image.html url="/assets/img/posts/2021-06-20-obsidian/templates.png" description="Markdown syntax on left, completed format on left" %}

This is also really nice for expanding on the SRD content provided in the refrences linked above. This
has made adding new monsters and NPCs a breeze, and I can rest easy knowing that all of the info I need
is present, because the whole process is fill-in-the-blank rather than remembering what's needed for
each individual templated-object.

#### Tooltips
Obsidian's major feature (the most important of the aforementioned "bullet-point features") is its
internal linking mechanisms. This is what elevates the editor from "markdown editor" to "knowledge base
builder."
In addition to standard in-document linking via anchor tags (like one would use to generate a table
of contents), there is also support for linking together two documents using quick easy-to-type shorthand.
The document-linking has a _lot_ of super cool features invovled with it that are beyond the scope
of this post, but I highly recommend you read up on them if you're considering trying out the editor.

One of the feautures document linking is a tooltip preview window, which allows you to peek at what
the contents of a file are before opening that file in a new pane.
Full disclosure: this is why we're here. The built-in tooltips are 100% what sold this for me
as an ideal-for-me game-running platform.
This doesn't sound like it's a game-changer, but it basically turns your DM board into a Crusader Kings
game. You can hover over link and get a full, well-formatted blurb explaining what exactly is going on
in its destination.

It works when linking two documents together, for a quick reference for an NPC, location, or monster
{% include embeded_image.html url="/assets/img/posts/2021-06-20-obsidian/inter_document_link.png" description="" %}

It's also useful for linking to somewhere else in the same document. I've been using this for keeping
track of the table of contents for each session, and also as a way of tracking minor NPCs who are not
worth writing out a full article for (basically, anyone who doesn't need a stat block)
{% include embeded_image.html url="/assets/img/posts/2021-06-20-obsidian/in_document_link.png" description="" %}

And, as if it could get any better, the tooltips also stack! While this isn't ideal for casual browsing,
I've found it to be very useful when running an encounter with a spellcaster.
{% include embeded_image.html url="/assets/img/posts/2021-06-20-obsidian/stacking.png" description="" %}

I realize it's a little overwhelming, but being able to navigate my notes quickly and efficiently
in the middle of a session has made it a lot easier to transition from player to game master, and
these tooltips are a perfect safety net for me. I switched to using Obsidian because it provided a
better document editing experience for me, but editing is only half of the story, and the tooltips
make document _reading_ an absolute joy.


#### So, uh, in conclusion

There are a lot of other things that I like about Obsidian, but these are the major highlights for
what I am guessing is a fairly niche (but certainly not unique) use-case. I've been gushing over
this setup for a few weeks now and haven't had an audience for it (the main person who would care is
one of my players :grimacing:), so I just wanted to take some time to gush more formally and
express gratitude for the above-linked reference files, and hopefully to help point anyone else in
the right direction.

I'll be back when I'm back, stay safe, stay cool :v:

#### Resources:
- [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/)
- [Running Tabletop Games with Obsidian](https://blog.mjb.im/running-tabletop-games-with-obsidian)
- [Obsidian 5e SRD](https://github.com/twisterghost/5e-obsidian)
- [Markdown 5e SRD](https://github.com/vitusventure/5thSRD) (the obsidian reference is based on this markdown conversion)

---

[^1]: I never wanted to be one of these people :see_no_evil:
[^2]: This is a core plugin, but is not turned on by default. To enable, flip the 'Templates' switch in Settings > Core plugins,
      which will add a `Templates` plugin option in your options menu
